---
useMath: true
title: 'Mathematical Background of Cryptography'
mathjax: true
date: 2023-02-02
permalink: /posts/2023/02/blog-post-73/
tags:
  - group
  - cryptography
---

# Mathematical Background of Cryptography


<!-- more -->

## Group Theory

**Group**: A group is a set $G$ together with a law of composition that has the following properties:

- ***Associative Law*** The law of composition is associative: $(ab)c = a(bc)$ for all $a, b, c$ in $G$.
- ***Identity Law*** $G$ contains an identity element $1$, such that $1a = a$ and $a 1 = a$ for all $a$ in $G$.
- ***Inverse Law*** Every element $a$ of $G$ has an inverse, an element $b$ such that $ab = 1$ and $ba = 1$.

if, in addition, composition satisfies the 

- ***Commutative Law*** $a \star b = b \star a$, for all $a, b \in G$.

then the group is called a commutative group or an abelian group. 

**群的定义**：设 $G$ 是一个非空集合，在$G$上定义了一个二元运算$\circ$，若$\circ$满足下面条件，则称$G$为一个群。

- 对于任意的$a,b,c \in G$，有
$$
(a \circ b) \circ c = a \circ (b \circ c)
$$
- 在$G$中存在一个元素$e$，它对$G$中的任意元素$g$，有
$$
e \circ g = g \circ e = g;
$$
- 对于$G$中任意元素$g$都存在$G$中的一个元素$g^\prime$使
$$
g \circ g^\prime = g^\prime \circ g = e. 
$$

**定义10-1**： 有限循环群是交换群（对于所有的元素都有$ab=ba$）.

**定义10-2**：素数阶群没有真子群；是循环群。

**定义10-3**：$G$为$n$阶有限循环群，则$G$的统计生成元共有$m = \phi(n)$（欧拉函数）个。（$1\leq m \leq n, (m, n) = 1$)）。即，小于$n$的整数中与$n$互质的数的个数。

**定理10-4**：$n$阶有限循环群$G$，若$m|n$,则$G$存在$m$阶子群并且是唯一的；也是循环群。

**Multiplicative Order**: In number theory, given an integer $A$ and a positive integer $N$ with $gcd(A, N)=1$, the ***multiplicative order*** of a modulo $N$ is the smallest positive integer $k$ with $A^k (\mod N) = 1. \quad (0 < k < N)$.


**Conjugate:** Let $G$ be a group. Two elements $a, b \in G$ are **conjugate** if there exists an element $g \in G$ such that $g a g^{-1} = b$, in which case $b$ is called ***a conjugate*** of $a$ and $a$ is called ***a conjugate*** of $b$.

**Normal subgroup:** In abstract algebra, a **normal subgroup** (also known as an **invariant subgroup** or **self-conjugate subgroup**) is a subgroup that is invariant under conjugation by members of the group of which it is a part. 

**Quotient group:** A quotient group is a mathematical group obtained by aggregating similar elements of a larger group using an equivalence relation that preserves some of the group structure.

**Multiplicative group of integers modulo $n$:** In modular arithmetic, the integers coprime (relatively prime) to $n$ from the set $\left\{0, 1, \ldots, n - 1 \right\}$ of $n$ non-negative integers form a group under multiplication modulo $n$, called the **multiplicative grokup of integers modulo $n$**. Equivalently, the elements of this group can be thought of as the ***congruence classes***, also known as residues modulo $n$, that are coprime to $n$. Hence another name is the group of **primitive residue classes modulo $n$**. 

**Lagrange's Theorem**: Let $G$ be a finite group and let $a \in G$. Then the order of a divides the order $G$. More precisely, let $n = |G|$ be the order of $G$ and let $d$ be the order of $a$, i.e., $a^d$ is the smallest positive power of $a$ that is equal to $e$. Then

$$
a^n = e \qquad \text{and} \qquad d | n. 
$$

**The Chinese remainder theorem**: Let $m_1, m_2, \ldots, m_k$ be a collection of pairwise relatively prime integers. This means that 


**Definition of Ring**: A ring is a set $R$ that has two operations, which we denote by $+$ and $\star$, satisfying the following properties:

- ***Properties of $+$***

  - ***Identity Law*** There is an additive identity $0 \in R$ such that $0 + a = a + 0 = a$ for every $a \in R$.
  - ***Inverse Law*** For every element $a \in R$ there is an additive inverse $b \in R$ such that $a + b = b + a = 0$.
  - ***Associative Law*** $a + (b + c) = (a +b )+c$ for all $a,b,c \in R$.  
  - ***Commutative Law*** $a + b = b + a$ for all $a , b \in R$,
  
(Breifly, if we look at $R$ with only the operation $+$, then it is a commutative group with (additive) identity element $0$.)

- ***Properties of $\star$***
  
  - ***Identity Law*** There is a multiplicative identity $1 \in R$ such that $1 \star a = a \star 1 = a$ for every $a \in R$.
  - ***Associative Law*** $a \star (b \star c) = (a \star b) \star c$ for all $a,b,c \in R$.
  - ***Commutative Law*** $a \star b = b \star a$ for all $a,b \in R$

- **Property Linking $+$ and $\star$**
  
  - ***Distribution Law*** $a \star  (b + c) = a \star b + a \star c$ for all $a, b, c \in R$.

**Definition of Field**: A (commutative) ring in which every nonzero element has a multiplicative inverse is called a field. 


**Definition**



# References

<a id="1">[1]</a>


<a id="2">[2]</a>
